Added UUID domain RFC (#32)
giantswarm/rfc: uuid-cluster-dns/README.md

# Using UUIDs for cluster endpoint domains

The current approach for building cluster domains is to include the workload cluster's ID as a subdomain of the management cluster it belongs to, e.g.:

```
https://api.j9yr2.k8s.gauss.eu-west-1.aws.gigantic.io
```

This approach has a few drawbacks:

1. The workload cluster is tied to the management cluster, making migration messy

> 2. Workload clusters cannot be "promoted" to management clusters as the domain would no longer make sense

Author: Yes, it's something that we'd like with CAPI. (It's prob best to take this whole document as being for CAPI as it's unlikely we'll update vintage to match)

> 3. Several customers have their own domain set up, leading to inconsistency between MCs

Reviewer: Can you please illustrate this with a (fake) example? It's not clear to me what this means.

Author: Added.

> 4. The provider (and region) is baked into the domain

Reviewer: Ideally you'd explain why that is a problem.

Author: Done :)

An alternative "flat" DNS structure has been proposed that removes the link between WC and MC. E.g.:

```
https://api.j9yr2.k8s.[customer name].gigantic.io
```

While this solves some of the above drawbacks (1, 2, 4) it introduces its own complications:

1. The customer name (or codename) is exposed in the domain

> 2. There is no enforced global uniqueness on cluster IDs so if a customer has multiple MCs there is a chance that two workload clusters have the same ID, leading to conflicting domains

Reviewer 2: I think this is a problem but to me it reveals a recurring issue:
We wanted `cluster IDs` to be a unique and "random" identifier. But users wanted to be able to control what it would look like and add meaning to them. Also to make it easier for automation to predict the ID.

Now we are introducing another random identifier - how can we prevent the same issues from reappearing?

Author: Isn't that what the `kubectl-gs template` command is for?

> But users wanted to be able to control what it would look like and add meaning to them.

This is the purpose of the description annotation isn't it?

Reviewer 2: Still customers choose IDs such as `peu01` as a specific means to give them reason.

Author: There's no reason that names / IDs can't still be a thing. Just under the hood every cluster is given a UUID to be used for things that really need to be unique like DNS.

Author: In fact, based on what @marians said it might actually be beneficial to have them as different things.

Reviewer 3: I think for UX purposes we can still have names/IDs, and UUIDs are then only for DNS. AFAICS customers do not really look at the DNS of their APIs, but rather care about the context name in the kubeconfig, but we can verify that assumption.

Reviewer: Yeah, bottom line: DNS and cluster name (as an identifier) are separate things.

## Proposal

The flat DNS structure can be improved to avoid the drawbacks above my leveraging a UUID for the cluster ID rather than a user-providable short string.

E.g.

```

> https://api.4c6aba87-061c-458d-91b6-62ad07979728.k8s.gigantic.io

Reviewer 2: What would the impact on automation be? E.g. how could a user easily find this URL in e.g. some automation pipeline?

Author: How do they currently find the kubeconfig?

Reviewer 2: But doesn't this have impact beyond the kubeconfig - e.g. for ingress names?

Finding the kubeconfig is usually done through a CLI where it's not a big issue. Maybe I am overthinking it here

Reviewer: I think we'd have to place this in the Cluster CR somewhere, e. g. as an annotation. Clients like happa have to expose this to the end user e. g. in order to show how to get access to the Kubernetes endpoint.

Also this is related to a question I had: Should the creator of a cluster be able to specify the DNS name?

Author: I'm not sure. What issues specifically are you thinking?

I imagine that if you have a kubeconfig then all other endpoints you need can be queried from the kube API. Not the nicest if doing manually but can be hidden away with some tooling perhaps.

Reviewer 4: Do we have any requirements beyond `opsctl` and `kubectl gs` working?

Author: Happa also. But not sure beyond that.

Reviewer: @AverageMarcus In happa we explain how to get a workload cluster's ingress base domain. See https://happa.g8s.gollum.westeurope.azure.gigantic.io/organizations/giantswarm/clusters/c68pn/ingress for example:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/273727/163997070-d255c505-a480-438d-bbeb-9cf4a0181151.png)

As long as we can derive the base domain from the workload clusters Kubernetes API endpoint, and as long as we can find that one in the Cluster CR, I think we are fine. And, in contrast to what I wrote above regarding an annotation, I'm assuming this will always be found in the cluster CR's `.spec.controlPlaneEndpoint.host` field.

Author: Oh that's very nice! :D

> https://api.4c6aba87-061c-458d-91b6-62ad07979728.k8s.gigantic.io

Reviewer 5: I'm not super opinionated on this so this isn't intended as opposition. There are nice technical/functional upsides of the UUID approach.

Just adding here - it's not very nice to look at or work with as a human. Granted, we try to minimize manual touches and wrap these details in CLI sugar, but in cases where someone has to type this manually, or where they encounter a UUID and have to figure out which cluster it belongs to, this isn't great since they're unordered and opaque by design. I also sometimes benefit from seeing some of those details (e.g. region) in the base domain. Maybe others do as well.

So I'm not opposing UUIDs. Most of the downsides could be mitigated with `kgs` features, so maybe it's worth simultaneously opening an issue for tracking usability improvements if this is adopted.

Author: I kinda agree with your points but also agree these should be dealt with through tooling and we shouldn't rely on a domain to give insight into specifics (as we already have customer-provided domains that don't follow that convention)

Reviewer 6: Just for context. The customer domains are old kvm installations that will be replaced with new installations and then turned off. There is only one (the oldest) AWS installation that uses a customer provided domain. We've stopped doing this because it is very painful.

```

For this to work, we'd need to remove the ability for user-provided cluster IDs and encourage the use of descriptions instead. If cluster names are still desired we could introduce the concept similar to how the description is (label or annotation).

This approach is also the same as used by many of the cloud providers for their managed Kubernetes offerings.

> The benefits of this approach:

Reviewer 2: FTR I agree with all these benefits, just wanted to also voice some concerns.

* Clusters are no longer tied to a specific management cluster

> * Clusters can be "renamed" and moved without changes needed to the domain

Reviewer: Let's make clear that renaming clusters is currently not a goal. UX wise, we currently have a cluster identifier (also the name of the Cluster resource) that is understood as immutable. In addition we offer the description which can be modified at will and labels which are also editable. Being able to rename clusters would be hard to justify IMO.

Author: We have seen instances where the ability to rename a cluster would be beneficial to a customer though. E.g. "promoting" a dev cluster to a production one. But I'm not suggesting that to be used as a driving force in any way.

2. Workload clusters cannot be "promoted" to management clusters as the domain would no longer make sense
3. Several customers have their own domain set up, leading to inconsistency between MCs (e.g. `eu-central-1.aws.cps.customer.com` vs. `gauss.eu-west-1.aws.gigantic.io`)
4. The provider (and region) is baked into the domain, effectively preventing multi-region (or multi-cloud)

An alternative "flat" DNS structure has been proposed that removes the link between WC and MC. E.g.:

```
https://api.j9yr2.k8s.[customer name].gigantic.io
```

While this solves some of the above drawbacks (1, 2, 4) it introduces its own complications:

1. The customer name (or codename) is exposed in the domain
2. There is no enforced global uniqueness on cluster IDs so if a customer has multiple MCs there is a chance that two workload clusters have the same ID, leading to conflicting domains

## Proposal

> Assumption: this is relevant only going forward with CAPI clusters and not to be "backported" to the vintage product.

The flat DNS structure can be improved to avoid the drawbacks above my leveraging a UUID for the cluster domain and dissasociate the cluster ID/Name from URLs.

E.g.

```

> https://api.4c6aba87-061c-458d-91b6-62ad07979728.k8s.gigantic.io

Reviewer 7: My understanding of the flat DNS structure was that we would still have a hosted zone per customer. At least that was what @kopiczko proposed if I'm not mistaken. This would still allow us to convert a workload cluster into a management cluster for the same customer.

We in Phoenix talked about slightly changing this by having a hosted zone per customer and cloud provider because otherwise we would have to do cross cloud DNS configuration, which is rather complicated (e.g. credentials management).

Author: The problem with that though is you're (potentially) exposing the customer name and it's then an issue if the customer changes for any reason (I believe we've seen this with one of our customers haven't we?)

Reviewer 8: but we dont need to put the real name there, just a unique name that serves to identify and discriminate between customers

Reviewer 4: We were talking about "customer ID" which isn't really related to the name. We should also be able to assign more than one domain ID per customer.

```

> For this to work, we'd need to generate a new UUID for a cluster either when running `kubectl-gs template cluster` (for use cases where GitOps are used) or via some defaulting logic when clusters CRs are applied.

Reviewer 6: `kubectl-gs template cluster` will generate an AppCR and the configmap with this values.yaml, correct? 
https://github.com/giantswarm/cluster-aws/blob/master/helm/cluster-aws/values.yaml

Cluster CRs won't get applied against the API directly anymore.

Ok, I've found it here for openstack: https://github.com/giantswarm/kubectl-gs/blob/891b222d7f003731005f09d95e86e236cabfa1f5/cmd/template/cluster/provider/capo.go#L28

@marians does it make sense to generate the unique identifier in the values yaml? I guess it needs to be this way because the AppCR AppName needs to be unique too and at least at the moment is generated by the cluster name within `kubectl gs` already.

https://github.com/giantswarm/kubectl-gs/blob/891b222d7f003731005f09d95e86e236cabfa1f5/cmd/template/cluster/provider/capo.go#L117

Cluster names and descriptions can still be used for labels and annotations to provide human-recognisable identifiers when using tools like Happa and kubectl.

This approach is also the same as used by many of the cloud providers for their managed Kubernetes offerings (e.g. EKS).

The benefits of this approach:

> * Clusters are no longer associated with a specific management cluster

Reviewer 6: They are :smile:. But not in a hierarchical DNS structure.

Author: Good point. I've updated to make it clearer.

* Clusters can be "renamed" (e.g. a cluster that was previously a dev enviroment being promoted to production) and moved (e.g. between cloud provider regions) without changes needed to the domain
* Infrastructure / environment details are no longer needed/exposed in the domain
* No potentially sensitive information can be leaked from the domain alone (so should be safe to use in GitHub tickets and similar)
* Conflicts in names are avoided by the use of UUIDs, even across customers and providers
* Workload clusters can more easily be "promoted" to management clusters by just installing the required Giant Swarm applications.

For customers that require the use of their own domains, some additional setup will be required to ensure the Kubernetes API's certificate is also valid for the customers domain (and then a CNAME can be set up to point to the UUID-based domain).

## Topics that need expanding

> * It's currently unclear how and where hosted zones will be created.

Reviewer 6: This is important to clarify. Especially from a security point of view we can not simply make this flat in terms of regions/installations. It would be good to discuss with sig-security imo and at best with our customers as well.

Btw the topic just came up here: https://github.com/giantswarm/roadmap/issues/1037#issuecomment-1096889203

# Using UUIDs for cluster endpoint domains

> Assumption: this is relevant only going forward with CAPI clusters and not to be "backported" to the vintage product.

## Current Approach

The current approach for building cluster domains is to include the workload cluster's ID as a subdomain of the management cluster it belongs to, e.g.:

```
Workload Cluster: https://api.j9yr2.k8s.gauss.eu-west-1.aws.gigantic.io
Management Cluster: https://dex.g8s.gauss.eu-west-1.aws.gigantic.io
```

The domain contains several parts:

1. The name of the service being accessed (`api`)
2. The workload cluster's ID, which can be user-provided (`j9yr2`) [Workload Cluster only]
3. The static string `k8s` or `g8s`
4. The codename of the management cluster (`gauss`)
5. The region the cluster is deployed into (`eu-west-1`)
6. The cloud provider (`aws`)
7. The static string `gigantic.io`

This approach has a few drawbacks:

> 1. The workload cluster is tied to the management cluster (belonging to it via domain heirarchy) which is problamatic if the cluster needs migrating to another management cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. The workload cluster is tied to the management cluster (belonging to it via domain hierarchy) which is problematic if the cluster needs migrating to another management cluster.
```

Author: Thank you! 😁

2. Similar to above, workload clusters cannot be "promoted" to management clusters as the domain would no longer make sense.

> 3. Several customers have their own domain set up, leading to inconsistency between MCs (e.g. `eu-central-1.aws.cps.customer.com` vs. `gauss.eu-west-1.aws.gigantic.io`).

Reviewer: From @teemow 's comment I understood that we should rather not strive for supporting custom domains in the future.

Author: Updated to state that custom domains are a non-goal. 👍

## Updated Proposal

The flat DNS structure can be improved to avoid the potential conflicts by leveraging a UUID for the cluster domain and dissasociate the cluster ID/Name from URLs.

E.g.

```
https://api.4c6aba87-061c-458d-91b6-62ad07979728.eu-west-1.aws.gigantic.io
```

For this to work we'd need to enforce creation of a new UUID for every cluster on creation.

Cluster names and descriptions can still be used for labels and annotations to provide human-recognisable identifiers when using tools like Happa and kubectl.

This approach is also the same as used by many of the cloud providers for their managed Kubernetes offerings (e.g. EKS).

The benefits of this approach:

* Clusters are no longer permanently associated with a specific management cluster
* The human-friendly cluster name and description are no longer bound to the limitations of DNS. (e.g. Length and valid characters)
* No potentially sensitive information can be leaked from the domain alone (so should be safe to use in GitHub tickets and similar)
* Conflicts in names are avoided by the use of UUIDs, even across customers and providers

> * Workload clusters can more easily be "promoted" to management clusters by just installing the required Giant Swarm applications

Reviewer: I would add another benefit:

- The generation process for the flexible part (the UUID part) is well documented. Also creation can be done one any tier and does not have to be done by a centralized authority. This enables a workflow where the cluster creator determines the endpoint URL upfront if desired.

Author: I'm not sure we'll be able to allow that. Otherwise a customer could pick any UUID they want (which could be already used by another customer). The creation of the UUID would need to be within our control.
